[spi_host doc] Documentation of Implementation Details (#8374)
lowRISC/opentitan: hw/ip/spi_host/doc/_index.md

  {name: "byte_valid_i", wave: "01............."},
  {name: "byte_last_i",  wave: "0....1.0......."},
  {name: "byte_ready_o", wave: "1....010...1..."},
  {name: "word_o[31:0]", wave: "2.2222222222222", data: ["0", "01","0102","010203", "01020304", "0", "05", "0500", "05000", "050000", "0", "06", "0607", "060708"]},
  {name: "word_valid_o", wave: "0....10...10..."},
  {name: "word_ready_i", wave: "1.............."}
  ],
 config: {hscale:2},
  head: {
  text: "Byte Merge Operation"
  }
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

## Shift Register

The SPI_HOST shift register serially transmits and receives all bytes to the `sd_o[3:0]` and `sd_i[3:0]` signals, based on the following timing-control signals from the FSM:
- `speed_i`: Controls the speed of the current data segment, ranging from `Standard` or `Dual` to `Quad`
- `wr_en_i`: Writes a new byte from the Byte Select into the 8-bit shift register
This is usually the first signal issued to the shift register in command segments with data to transmit (i.e., TX only, or bidirectional segments)
   - There is also a `wr_ready_o` output to tell the FSM that there is no data currently available

>      If `wr_ready_o` is deasserted when the FSM asserts `wr_en_i`, the FSM will stall

Author: ```suggestion
     If `wr_ready_o` is deasserted when the FSM asserts `wr_en_i`, the FSM will stall.
```

The FSM transitions to the `WaitTrail` state only when the entire segment has been transmitted/received (as indicated by the signals last_bit and last_byte).
This state machine usually only lasts stays in this state for one timeslice, except when the FSM is disabled or stalled.

4. InternalClkLow state: This state serves to drive `sck` low between visits to the `InternalClkHigh` state.
This state always returns back to the `InternalClkHigh` state in the next timeslice.

5. WaitTrail state: Similar to the WaitLead, this state serves to control the timing of the `csb` line.
The FSM uses the `wait_cntr` register to ensure that it remains in this state for `csntrail+1` timeslices, during which time the active `csb` is still held low.
The `wait_cntr` register resets to {{< regref "CONFIGOPT.CSNTRAIL" >}} upon entering this state, and is decremented once per timeslice.
This state transitions to `WaitIdle` when `wait_cntr` is zero.

6. WaitIdle state: In this timing control state, the FSM uses the `wait_cntr` register to ensure that all `csb` lines are held high for at least `csnidle+1` timeslices.

> The `wait_cntr` register resets to {{< regref "CONFIGOPT.CSNIDLE" >}} upon entering this state, and is decremented once per timeslice.

Author: ```suggestion
The `wait_cntr` register resets to {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS.CSNIDLE" >}} upon entering this state, and is decremented once per timeslice.
```

{{< incGenFromIpDesc "../data/spi_host.hjson" "hwcfg" >}}

# Design Details

## Component Overview

> Transaction data words flow through the SPI_HOST IP in a cycle which starts with the TX FIFOs, shown in the block diagram above.

Author: ```suggestion
Transaction data words flow through the SPI_HOST IP in a path which starts with the TX FIFOs, shown in the block diagram above.
```

All of the blocks in the data path use ready-valid handshakes for flow control.
In addition, the Byte Select block expects a `flush` pulse from the shift register to signify when no further data is needed for the current segment, and so any remaining data in the current word can be discarded.
Likewise, the Byte Merge block receives a `last` signal from the shift register to identify the end of a command segment so that any partial words can be passed into the RX FIFO (regardless of whether the last byte forms a complete 32-bit word).
The shift register is then responsible for driving and receiving data on the `cio_sd` lines.
It coordinates all of the data flow to and from the Byte Select and Byte Merge blocks.

The SPI_HOST FSM parses the software command segments and orchestrates the proper transmission of data through its control of the shift register.
The FSM directly drives the `cio_sck` and `cio_csb` signals at the commanded speed.
It also controls the shift register: dictating the correct timing for sending out each beat of data, loading bytes from the Byte Select, and sending bytes on to the Byte Merge block.

## RX and TX FIFOs

> The TX and RX FIFOs store the transmitted and received data, while also serving as the clock domain crossing for SPI data.

Author: ```suggestion
The RX and TX FIFOs store the transmitted and received data, while also serving as the clock domain crossing for SPI data.
```

So in each direction there is at least one asynchronous FIFO, which serves as the CDC.
The RX FIFO is 32 bits wide, matching the width of the TLUL register bus.
The TX FIFO on the other hand is 36 bits wide, with 32 bits of SPI data (again to match the TLUL bus width) plus 4 byte enable-bits, which are passed into the core to allow the processing of unaligned writes.

The depth of these FIFOs is controlled by two independent parameters for the RX and TX queues.

> Since the depth of asynchronous FIFOs is usually limited to powers of two, the TX or RX queue may consist of *two* FIFO components: an mandatory asynchronous FIFO and a possible synchronous component, connected in series.

Author: ```suggestion
Since the depth of asynchronous FIFOs is usually limited to powers of two, the RX or TX queue may consist of *two* FIFO components: an mandatory asynchronous FIFO and a possible synchronous component, connected in series.
```

  {name: "clk_core_i",   wave: "p.............."},
  {name: "byte_i[7:0]",  wave: "x22222.2....22x", data: ["01", "02", "03", "04", "05", "06", "07", "08"]},
  {name: "byte_valid_i", wave: "01............."},
  {name: "byte_last_i",  wave: "0....1.0......."},
  {name: "byte_ready_o", wave: "1....010...1..."},
  {name: "word_o[31:0]", wave: "2.2222222222222", data: ["0", "01","0102","010203", "01020304", "0", "05", "0500", "05000", "050000", "0", "06", "0607", "060708"]},
  {name: "word_valid_o", wave: "0....10...10..."},
  {name: "word_ready_i", wave: "1.............."}
  ],
 config: {hscale:2},
  head: {
  text: "Byte Merge Operation"
  }
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

## Shift Register

The SPI_HOST shift register serially transmits and receives all bytes to the `sd_o[3:0]` and `sd_i[3:0]` signals, based on the following timing-control signals from the FSM:
- `speed_i`: Controls the speed of the current data segment, ranging from `Standard` or `Dual` to `Quad`
- `wr_en_i`: Writes a new byte from the Byte Select into the 8-bit shift register
This is usually the first signal issued to the shift register in command segments with data to transmit (i.e., TX only, or bidirectional segments)

>    - There is also a `wr_ready_o` output to tell the FSM that there is no data currently available

Author: ```suggestion
   - There is also a `wr_ready_o` output to tell the FSM that there is no data currently available.
```

In this mode, each `shift_en_i` pulse is induces a shift of only one bit.
- In Dual-mode, the two most significant bits, `sr_q[7:6]`, are connected to `sd_o[1:0]` and the shift register shifts by two bits with eery `shift_en_i` pulse.
- In Quad-mode, the four most significant bits, `sr_q[7:4]`, are connected to `sd_o[3:0]` and the shift register shifts four bits with every pulse.

The connections to the shift register inputs are similar.
Depending on the speed, the `sd_i` inputs are routed to the the 1, 2, or 4 least significant inputs of the shift register.
In full-cycle mode, the shift register LSB's are updated directly from the `sd_i` inputs.
Otherwise the data first passes through an input sampling register, `sd_i_q[3:0]`, which allows the input sampling events to be staggered from the output shift events.

### Bubbles in the Data Pipeline

Temporary delays in the transmission or receipt data are a performance issue.
Stall events, which temporarily halt operation of the SPI_HOST IP, often indicate that software is not keeping up with data in the TX and RX FIFOs.

> For this reason the SPI_HOST IP can create interrupts to help monitor the frequency of these stall events, in order to indentify correctable performance delays.

Author: Interesting.  How did flyspell miss that one.  Thanks for the catch.

> For this reason the SPI_HOST IP can create interrupts to help monitor the frequency of these stall events, in order to indentify correctable performance delays.

Author: ```suggestion
For this reason the SPI_HOST IP can create interrupts to help monitor the frequency of these stall events, in order to identify correctable performance delays.
```

> There is also the possibility of encountering bubble events with cause transient stalls in the data pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
There is also the possibility of encountering bubble events, which cause transient stalls in the data pipeline.
```

Transient stalls only occur for Quad-mode segments, and only when transmitting or receiving words with only one valid byte.

When transmitting at full clock speed, Quad-mode segments need to process one byte every four clock cycles.
If a particular Quad TX segment pulls only one byte from a particular data word (for reasons related either to the segment length or odd data alignment), the `prim_packer_fifo` used in the Byte Select block can generate delays of up to four clocks before releasing the next byte.
This can cause temporary stall conditions either during the Quad segment, or--if there is another TX segment immediately following--just before the following segment.

Similar delays exist when receiving Quad-mode data, which are similarly worst when packing words with just one byte (i.e., when receiving segments of length 4n+1).
The RX pipeline is however much more robust to such delays, thanks to buffering in the shift register outputs.
There is some sensitivity to *repeated* 4 clock delays, but it takes at least six of them to cause a temporary stall.
So transient RX stalls only occur when receiving more than six consecutive one-byte segments.

> As this is an unlikely use case, and so transient stalls are considered an unlikely occurence. 

Author: ```suggestion
As this is an unlikely use case, transient stalls are considered an unlikely occurrence in the RX path.
```

  {name: 'Timeslice Boundary', wave: "1...H...H...H.....H...H"}
],
  edge: ["A<->B min. 9 cycles", "C<->D min. 4 cycles"],
 head: {text: "Use of FSM Enable Pulses to Realize Multi-Clock Timeslices", tock: 1},
 foot: { text: "The fsm_en signal is always high in idle states, to allow exit transitions at any time"}
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

#### Other Internal Counters

In addition to the FSM state register, the SPI_HOST FSM block also has a number of internal registers to track the progress of a given command segment.

- `wait_cntr_q`: This counter is used the hold the FSM in a particular state for several timeslices, in order to implement the `CSNIDLE`, `CSNLEAD` or `CSNTRAIL` delays required for a particular device.

- `byte_cntr_q`, `bit_cntr_q`: These counters respectively track the number of bytes left to transmit for the current segment and the number of bits left to transmit in the current byte.

- Finally, there are registers corresponding to each configuration field (`csid_q`, `cpol_q`, `cpha_`, `csnidle_q`, `csnlead_q`, `csntrail_q`, and `full_cyc_q`) and to each command segment field (`csaat`, `cmd_rd_en`, `cmd_wr_en`, and `cmd_speed`).

> This registers are sampled whenever a new command comes it, allowing the command inputs to change.

Reviewer: Typo: "These registers" and "comes i**n**"

Author: ```suggestion
This registers are sampled whenever a new command comes in, allowing the command inputs to change.
```

### Basic Operation

> The state machine itself easiest understood by first considering a simple case, with CSAAT set to zero.

Reviewer: Typo: "is easiest"

Author: ```suggestion
The state machine itself is easiest understood by first considering a simple case, with CSAAT set to zero.
```

For his reason, the FSM uses the `wait_cntr` to track the number of timeslices spent in this state, and only exits when `wait_cntr` counts down to zero, at which point the FSM transitions to the `InternalClkHigh` state.

3. InternalClkHigh state: Entering this state drives `sck` high.
This state repeats many times per segment, and usually transitions to the `InternalClkLow` state.
The FSM transitions to the `WaitTrail` state only when the entire segment has been transmitted/received (as indicated by the signals last_bit and last_byte).
This state machine usually only lasts stays in this state for one timeslice, except when the FSM is disabled or stalled.

4. InternalClkLow state: This state serves to drive `sck` low between visits to the `InternalClkHigh` state.
This state always returns back to the `InternalClkHigh` state in the next timeslice.

5. WaitTrail state: Similar to the WaitLead, this state serves to control the timing of the `csb` line.
The FSM uses the `wait_cntr` register to ensure that it remains in this state for `csntrail+1` timeslices, during which time the active `csb` is still held low.

> The `wait_cntr` register resets to {{< regref "CONFIGOPT.CSNTRAIL" >}} upon entering this state, and is decremented once per timeslice.

Reviewer: Should be CONFIGOPTS, I think. Similarly for the bullet below.

Author: ```suggestion
The `wait_cntr` register resets to {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS.CSNTRAIL" >}} upon entering this state, and is decremented once per timeslice.
```

This signal corresponds to the FSM's `wr_en_o` port, though that output is suppressed during RX or dummy segments.
- `byte_ending`: This signal indicates the end of the current `sd` byte in the *current* clock cycle (i.e., the next clock cycle either marks the beginning new byte or the end of the current segment).
As illustrated in the following waveform, the `byte_starting` and `byte_ending` signals are often asserted at the same time, though there is an extra `byte_starting` pulse at the beginning of each command and an extra `byte_ending` pulse at the end.
For RX and bidirectional command segments, a `byte_ending` pulse generates a `rd_en_o` pulse to the shift register, which transfers the 8-bit contents of the shift register into the RX FIFO via the Byte Merge block.
- `bit_shifting`: This signal drives the `shift_en_o` control line to the shift register, ejecting the most-significant bits, and updating the `sd` outputs.

These *milestone signals* mark the progress of each command segment.

The coordination of the milestone signals and the shift register controls are shown in the following waveform.

> {{< wavejson >}}

Reviewer: Are the arrows right here? They seem to skip backwards and forwards in time, which looks a bit odd to me.

Author: I agree it looks strange. However, the link between these signals is all combinational logic, and the causality is technically correct. The lower signal lines are driven high because the signals above have their values.    This all happens within the same clock cycle however, which is something particular that wavedrom seems not very helpful at illustrating.  Do you have any suggestions?

Author: Hi @rswarbrick, 
   Still not sure what do about the direction of the arrows, but I added a comment at the bottom. "NOTE: The milestone signals have a combinational dependence on the FSM state.".

Reviewer: Hmm. For example, here:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/104845/135603371-2768f3bd-4b6a-4c4d-b087-50f3cd046c42.png)

it looks like `byte_starting` going high depends on the fact that `state` will go to `WL` on the next cycle. I assume that's not quite right!

If the path is supposed to be `state = Idle -> byte_starting = 1 -> sample_en_o = 1` then I think you just need to move the `Z` label two dots to the left. Or is this supposed to mean something else?

Author: "it looks like byte_starting going high depends on the fact that state will go to WL on the next cycle. I assume that's not quite right!"
It *is* quite right!  That is exactly what is going on here.   It's magic, right?   Well no, not really, but I agree that it does make for a charmingly mysterious diagram.  

However thanks to your insistence, I now see how to make it clearer.

The issue is that FSM needs to instruct the shift register to do all these things as it *enters* the corresponding state.  So for example `byte_starting_cpha0` needs to be high as the FSM enters the WaitLead state.  The simplest way to express this is to peek at `state_d` whenever the `state_q` flops are enabled
 .
I can add `state_d` on the diagram, and then it will be clear that causality remains in effect in this IP.

Author: Hi @rswarbrick, what do you think if it after this latest commit?

Reviewer: Ahah! That makes sense now! Yep, looks good to me (and no wibbly-wobbly timey-wimey stuff :-))

Author: That's a relief.   I've removed the timey-wimey wibbly-wobbly stuff from the following diagram as well.
